talking with Sam S.E.M., and we pronounce it Suter, S-U-T-T-E-R, at the University of Chicago, and we're in the Ludwig, L-U-D-W-I-G, Rosenberger, R-O-S-E, and V-E-R-G-E-R, Library of Judaica.
Very interesting.
I haven't done any Judaica stuff yet.
Well, this is not a Judaica collection that represents what Judaica probably conjures up for you immediately, because there is almost no religious literature in it at all.
What Ludwig was interested in intellectually and what he was interested in collecting was material on the secular history of the Jews, Jewish involvement in various realms of human endeavor through history, and he collected only languages that he could read.
Really?
That's very interesting, isn't it?
And there's very little Hebrew in it.
because he didn't read Hebrew, and I think there's no Yiddish in it, or if so, only a stray volume or two here and there.
He was a housewares wholesaler in Chicago.
He left Germany in the early 20s, went to Palestine for a few years, and left
left palestine i think in 27 or 28 and came to the states and came to chicago almost right away um so that all of his collecting activity really took place after he was here um and he was he was not an incredibly wealthy man this was you know but this this was what was important to him like this is this is where he poured
Every dollar that he could spare.
Is there any anecdotal stuff published on him or written on him?
There's a New York Times article on him which I Xeroxed for you and I've got that out there.
You're anticipating all my needs.
His widow is still alive if you're interested in talking to her and I can give you her address and phone number and so on.
He died a couple of years ago.
This came after his death?
This actually came before his death.
This came to the library in 1980.
He must have died in 88.
He died before or after I left the department.
It doesn't matter.
We'll check.
He died, like, 86, 87, 88.
But the point is, he made the decision to see it come here.
Yes.
And obviously, we weren't the only people interested in this collection.
I would have to say Brandeis and Yashiva would have been right there.
Here's a lovely published version of his catalog.
I can get that at Harvard.
Which he, Breunion College Press, published.
I'm sure that they thought they were going to get the collection.
What happened?
Why didn't they?
Well, I think there were a couple of factors involved in his final decision of where it should go.
He'd had a long personal relationship with Bob Rosenthal, which certainly played a role.
But I think not wanting the books to go somewhere where he wasn't close to them
was very important to him because at the time when he gave the books, he was still in good enough health that he would come out to the university several times a week and spend the morning sort of puttering around in here.
Did you set aside this room for him?
Yeah.
So that was one of the perks.
One of the inducements, shall I say.
Right, right.
Perhaps we have to do it.
Right.
Give me about five figures of numbers.
Roughly 22,000, I think.
And how do you rank it?
I've heard from various sources that at the time that it came here, it was the largest collection of Judaica in private hands.
And he did this on modest means.
Yeah, I mean, he wasn't poor, but neither was he fabulously wealthy.
No, he wasn't a kind of burden.
No.
Great, great, great grandson of the realist.
No, no, no.
And probably another factor in bringing the book, in giving the books here, I think, was the fact that this was a secular institution rather than a religious one.
Hmm, interesting.
Because his view of what he was interested in collecting was Jews in a broader context, not Jewish religion.
And so giving it to an institution where it would be seen in a broader context I think was important to him.
For example, just looking at his rather idiosyncratic categories for the
for the for the collection yeah uh well here look at look at this which stretches from from here to
Well, to here.
Nearly 100 pages in the catalog are Marx, Engels, Jewish Socialists, LaSalle, Rosa Luxemburg, Trotsky.
These are not things that you think of as Judaica.
That's amazing.
Emma Goblin.
Yeah, yeah.
It was a Western woman.
Yeah.
Let's go around the corner and look at some stuff.
What's really...
What's a high spot, would you say?
What's a high spot?
What's really extraordinary?
Is this a collection that's magnificent by its breadth?
I would say so, because it has a lot of stuff here that obviously is not rare.
It's a collection that's great by virtue of the fact that it's a collection.
Right.
Is that a fair assessment?
That's a fair assessment, but there's also incredibly rare stuff here.
There are pieces that are
that as far as he knew and as far as we've been able to determine are unique.
Oh, that's very... I almost missed that one.
That's the kind of thing we're looking for, that I'm looking for.
Now, he could have walked right to things, but... And did he?
He knew the collection.
Yes, and he would say, Now, Sam, it's a book.
It's about this size, and it's in green Morocco.
That's nice.
So you knew him?
Yeah, because actually... That was on your earlier watch, so to speak.
When I was hired in this department, it was just after the collection had come in, and it had just been unpacked, and one of my first assignments was to work through it with him and put it in order.
So I got to know him fairly well.
Where's the Ozzy Hunter?
I love this.
Did he buy basically from dealers or was he a regular book hunter or a scout, do you think?
He'd go all over.
Some of each, I think.
It was very hard to get him talking about where books came from.
Oh, really?
He was very reticent in talking about things.
I think one reason for that was that a lot of these books were books that were on the market because of the Holocaust.
These were books that had been ripped away from someone and eventually came on the market.
Really?
You know, and so if you think about that very much, that's profoundly disturbing.
A lot of these came from Europe then, obviously, is what we're saying.
Yeah.
For example, I mean, here's an ownership stamp, Bibliothek der Judische Gemeinde Berlin, the library of the Jewish congregation in Berlin.
This is the one that, as far as anyone's been able to determine, is a unique copy.
Well, I better write it down, huh?
I don't blame her.
Yeah, and this will be in that exhibit catalog.
I can point it out to you in there.
That may be easier than trying to write it down.
Which you've given me, right?
Yeah, it's by Osiander.
O-Z?
Yeah, it's spelled O-S-I-A-N-D-E-R.
D-A-R?
E-R.
First name, Andreas.
Unique item.
And it's a 16th century.
He was a Lutheran reformer.
And this is a 16th century pamphlet defending Jews from the accusation that they engaged in blood rituals.
Oh, I've got to tell you something about this.
The title is, if it's true and believable that Jews secretly strangle Christian children and use their blood.
I'm going to go off just for a second.
Sure.
It doesn't fall on anybody.
I'm sorry to get off on that track.
No, it's fine.
But you see, that kind of dovetails with that little thing, that little story that I'm going to tell in my book.
Yeah.
That's a unique item.
And we don't know how he got it.
No, no.
He got it after the war sometime, is really all I know.
Did he keep any records of the sources?
Well, there are all sorts of invoices and so on, but they're completely disorganized.
So that's a job for somebody.
It's a job for somebody, and I'm not sure to what extent someone can sort it out.
Well, it all depends on how important it is, too.
If it were important to know, you know,
It could be important to somebody like me, not me.
Then they'll be the ones who can go through it.
Let's look at some other stuff here.
That's nice.
You see, that's where the collector is responsible for the preservation of important things.
This is one of the things that I sold my... One of the...
What was the first edition of Das Kapitales?
That's exceedingly scarce.
May I just touch it?
Sure.
It's important to me.
Really, I didn't realize it was bound so normally.
It's just a regular... That's volume one, and this is volume two.
They weren't published at the same time.
At least you want to... Right.
Das Kapitales.
What was the... First...
The first volume is 1867.
Wow.
And the second one isn't until, uh, 85.
Does he have a Mein Kampf?
Yes, he has several Mein Kampfs.
And there was one that he would always drag out to show people, and I would just cringe.
I mean, you know, instead of showing some of the other things, this was always one of the first things that he wanted to show people.
And now his wife does the same, his widow does the same.
Why though?
Why?
Is this going to be made clear to me when you do this?
His wife says that this was used on a ceremonial occasion in Nuremberg.
I can't document that.
I never repeat that.
This is about a double folio size.
It's enormous.
What's the binding?
Is that a vellum?
It's vellum, yeah.
Oh, go back.
Oh, okay.
Oh, my God.
There it is.
And it was obviously done... It was obviously reproduced photographically from the first edition.
This was?
Yeah.
That's obviously how you get it, because if you compare it page for page... The type is the same.
The type is the same.
That's about, would you just estimate the size of that?
Wow, that's about... That's probably about 22 inches, something like that.
22 inches by perhaps a foot and a half.
Yeah.
Wow.
And this is the first right now?
Yeah, this is the first.
So this was reproduced from the first?
Right.
And there's the Frentice piece with Adolf Hitler.
Does this also have a Hitler Frentice piece?
No, no.
Who was the publisher of this?
It doesn't, it doesn't seem to... What is this?
Can you read that to me?
All rights reserved, copyright, volume 1, 1925, volume 2, 1927, by Franz Eyer's successors, Incorporated, Munich.
Which is here.
Well, now here, this is published by the central press of the Nazi party.
Wow.
And then it says Franz Eyer's successors, Incorporated,
Munich, so they must have absorbed the firm or something.
E-H-E-R.
The first firm was 1925.
I didn't realize it went back that far.
Here's another.
This is just like Das Kapital in terms of the two volumes appearing separately.
This is the second volume, which is 27.
And so when he would show this, what did he say?
What kinds of things did he say?
I'm trying to remember.
It's almost like a religious... Yeah, yeah.
What he would say was that as far as he knew, there were only two copies of it.
Now, I don't know where... I don't remember where the other copy was.
Do you realize how many horrible things this one was present at?
Yeah, yeah.
You know, what this must have been used.
Yeah.
something, isn't it?
Oh, I know what to show you.
Wow.
If we can't stay in here too long, we've got to see other things.
By the way, you let me know where you have to go out.
Oh, I can take whatever time we need.
Okay, good.
I mean, I don't want to interrupt any luncheon appointments or something.
No, I don't really have anything else on the dog.
Oh.
Jacuzzi.
is this the this is right the driver's affair yeah that's it and this is yeah and you know this is the famous article that's the email Zola article that's it yep let me just take a couple notes and we'll shut up this is a relevant it's not it's not a complete run but it's relevant issues of Leroy dealing dealing with the drivers affair l apostrophe a-u-r-o-r
And what we have done is encapsulate them because the paper is so fragile.
It wouldn't survive being turned.
I'm sure you've copied these.
These are available on microfiche or microfilm.
Yeah.
They got them in pretty nice shape, too, didn't they?
Well, maybe we ought to move on.
We can just see if we can sort of circle around this way.
That's fine.
Are you going to leave those out?
Yeah.
We can get them out for now.
You have a seismograph in here?
No.
Is that what that is over there?
It registers temperature and humidity.
Oh, okay.
That's for the world.
It looks like a seismograph.
Yeah, it does, doesn't it?
Lots of editions of Josephus.
Beautiful.
Well, here are some incunables, right?
Yeah, yeah.
How many incunables would you say?
In this collection.
I think there must be a dozen and a half, something like that.
You're going to have to open it up.
Yeah.
Is that much use from the scholarly community?
Not as much as it should.
Unfortunately, at this point, none of these books are represented in the general catalog.
And that's something we'd like to change.
And unfortunately, people here
Rosenberger collection of Judaica, and it doesn't occur to them to look here for things like all that Jewish socialist material and so on.
So we want to do something to change that.
You have to look at it.
It's not important.
Don't bother.
It might be Edgar Lee Masters.
I think it might be Edgar Lee Masters.
I didn't know his son, Hillary.
This is part of the...
John Carrar collection of rare books in the history of science, medicine, and technology.
This is a preeminent collection.
It is.
Carrar himself had nothing to do with collecting it.
He was a Chicago railroad man who left a bequest for a free public library.
Chicago has these things.
It's like the Newbery thing.
Yeah, so this is the counterpart of the Newbery.
Fairly early on, I think in 1909 or something like that, the Newberry, the Crerar, and Chicago Public sat down together and decided that they ought to each define a scope for themselves.
Scope Crerar for my typist, please.
C-R-E-R-A-R.
Thank you.
And so the Currar Library then specialized in medicine, science, and technology.
Newberry specialized in the humanities.
And the Public Library was the more popular collection.
And there were some materials that were exchanged at that point.
There is an interesting triumvirate in Chicago, isn't there?
There are three parts, I guess, where the decisions were made that directions would be certain directions.
Is that right?
Yeah.
Is that true?
And it's worked out for everybody.
Right.
So this, the PRR existed as an independent institution until 1980.
God, that's great.
Four, I believe.
Wow.
I think that's the date of the merger.
This is a very impressive role.
They had a harder and harder time making a go of it and then merged with the university.
And at that point, we built...
We built a new science library that's a block and a half away from here that's called the Career R Library.
But this is the core collection.
And this is the rare collection.
Was this built by institutional collectors, basically?
Or do we have any input here from private collections?
There are a couple of private collections within it.
There's the Nicholas Sen collection, which we'll see downstairs.
Sen was a surgeon.
And that's probably 8,000 volumes or so.
There's the Gruley collection in pediatrics and the Levis cookbook collection.
And I think all of those have non-rare as well as rare.
I'm surprised you guys didn't rule Louis for the cookbook collection.
I think we were too late.
Yeah, you know, I know what happened to that outside when we were off the machine.
Now, this looks intriguing.
Oh, that's something, huh?
What do we call this?
Well, it's a typical German stamped vellum binding.
And this is a German herbal.
It's a herbal.
These are wood engravings, they must be?
Yeah.
Magnificent.
It's the original binding.
It's a knockout of a book.
How old?
What have we got here?
1625.
Yeah, and this is definitely a 17th century binding.
In fact, it's almost like a late 16th century binding.
It's rather a condition.
So that's a very interesting story, isn't he?
Yeah.
The thing that's funny is that he was a very devout Presbyterian, I guess it was, and gave all sorts of money for Presbyterian Sunday schools and so on.
And the language of his will setting up this library specifies that this money is not to go for
Um,
Dirty French novels or skeptical trash.
Is there a... Can I get a card?
I'll get that somewhere for you, yeah.
You've got to do that for me.
I'm doing a thing with Wills, you know.
The Wills are becoming very... It's happening.
I mean, the Pepys codicil and the Newbery thing with the daughters who died without issues.
Right, yes.
That's a fascinating thing.
I mean, who would have thought that there was never going to be a library as a result of that?
And then in New York, you've got the Lennox and the Esters and then Tilden.
You know, they had no idea the New York Public Library was going to come out of that.
Yeah.
But there were provisions there for this kind of thing to happen.
So, of course, at the time of the merger, we had to hire all sorts of extra help to do all kinds of projects related to it.
Well, some of the staff members got the idea to do a t-shirt for the project.
And they took a book plate, which says,
Great is the gift that bringeth knowledge.
That's a nice, uh, whatever you call that.
Yes.
And that's, did they use his picture?
They used his picture.
But then they added a caption below that said, no dirty French novels or skeptical trash.
Do they still sell that?
Is that around?
I don't think there are any around.
I've got one at home.
That's great.
This is the treasure room, so to speak, for the Kruar.
Actually, this is only half of the Kruar Rare Collection.
The other half is downstairs.
We'll see it down there.
We didn't have a big enough place.
What do you do to protect the stuff?
Is it Halloween?
No, we don't.
That's controversial.
Tell me about it.
J.C.
Brown is just opening its new wing.
This is what we call the manuscript search room.
The idea was to bring together in one place
the basic tools that one would need for studying manuscripts or preparing to work with manuscripts.
So we have most of the library's holdings on paleography and most of the library's holdings of printed catalogs of manuscript collections around the world.
And there's a professor in the classics department who teaches
course nearly every year on the Latin Codex book, and he usually holds the class in here and uses codices from the collection.
This Lincoln collection over here, that's something that we sat among there?
Yeah.
The Great Lincoln Collection is with the Illinois State Historical Society, isn't that right?
And that's the standard by which all others are measured.
So we don't really have to go into this until we... Yeah.
The core of this collection was collected by William Barton, who was an amateur Lincoln biographer early in the century.
And he gave his collection to the... I don't know if it was he or maybe his heirs gave the collection to the university in...
It's books, basically.
It's not primary stuff.
There are manuscripts downstairs as well, and incredible amounts of ephemera, most of which are of no scholarly interest whatsoever.
He turned over everything.
And then the family endowed a fund to continue to add to the collection.
And eventually you have to start branching out in other related areas in order to keep using the money.
There's a fair amount of Civil War material, material on slavery, and so on.
This is part of the Helen and Ruth Regenstein collection of rare books.
R-E-G-E-N-S-T-E-I-N.
And this is the Joseph Regenstein Library.
Helen and Ruth were what, sisters?
No, mother and daughter.
Mother and daughter.
Were they collectors?
Helen was a collector.
Oh, great.
Yes.
Finding good women collectors isn't that easy thing to do.
Ruth...
Ruth, the daughter, I think was not really involved in the collecting, off the record.
I think she's sort of a borderline retarded person who, if she'd been born into an unprivileged family, probably would have made it on her own.
But I think what we're saying is that her name is attached to the bequest.
It's attached to the collection.
To the bequest, I'm sure.
Actually, Ruth is still alive.
um it's not important helen helen gave what she had collected and then then gave money to continue collecting and in the early years she she and bob worked very closely together to continue to develop the collection uh this is great stuff uh bought a copy of post hammer lane which i can show you in the vault after a while yeah we don't have one in new england
New England doesn't have one.
Not another one.
Well, I mean, Harvard doesn't have one.
Harvard would like one.
And at Mass Historical, at the Athenaeum, I beg your pardon.
What was the source of their fortune?
It must have been considerable to be able to buy a Tamerlane.
Belsicol Chemical Company.
How do you spell?
Belsicol.
He also, I guess, as I understand it, was the person who came up with the idea of the windowed envelope.
So that's where the money came.
What was the focus of the collection?
I see there's the 1612 first edition of Chapman's Homer.
You mentioned a post-Tamerling.
Well, the original focus of the collection, and I guess still the primary focus of the collection, is
is high spots of English and American literature, but also, quote, continental works of recognized merit.
Such as Anna Karenin, War and Peace.
She was interested in things like, you know, first translations into English of things that were classics.
I've got that information in the life of George Washington.
Do you have it in parts?
No.
So I don't have it, right?
There it is, in parts, by Putnam.
Yep.
Nice.
Good stuff.
This is Parklands, Oregon Trail.
There's a whole section in the vault.
which we should go into soon.
The whole section of her stuff.
Decline and fall of the Roman Empire.
Boy, can I just see one of those?
Sure, sure.
Anything you spot here that grabs your fancy, just to say so.
Gibbon was quite a full collector in his own way.
Oh, boy.
Now, this must have been... You don't think that this was rebound, I would say.
You think that was how the original binding is?
This is probably a contemporary, a roughly contemporary binding, I would think.
Wonderful.
It feels nice.
Yeah.
This is the second volume.
That's right.
MDCCLXXI.
1781.
Great.
That was Gibbon, Annette.
Declared for.
Let's go into the vault.
Somebody will let us in because since I know I'm the member of the department, I don't know the combination.
This is nice.
Which is fine with me.
This is an enormous room.
Yeah, and there's another room down below.
Really?
This is as big as they come.
This is the vault, right?
This is the vault.
I was in Newbury's vault yesterday, which is kind of nice.
Here I will put my tent away.
That would make you feel a little better.
That would make me feel better.
It's a remarkable shape, isn't it?
Yeah.
Now, I don't remember what he paid for this, but there was a lot of publicity at the time.
Which one is this?
Do you know?
They have names.
I wonder if this is the one that came out of Worcester.
I don't know.
That's something I can check on for you and let you know.
Yeah, a small thing.
That is Tamerlane.
T-A-M-E-R-L-A-N-E.
which is now an exhibit at the North Public Library, too.
Oh, that's nice.
This contains the treasures of many collectors, right?
Many collectors.
Yes, yes.
Now, which of these is the Malgold I want?
No, it's the other one.
Two copies.
There are two copies of the whale here.
The whale, of course, is British in the first verse.
This is the Helen and Ruth Regenstein copy.
It's inscribed, Henry Hubbard from his old shipmate and watchmate aboard, no, on board, the good ship, A-C-H-U-S-H-N-E-T.
Alas, wrecked at last on the Northwest, Herman Melville, March 23rd, 1853, Pittsfield.
Alas, comma, just let me do it.
Sure.
Wrecked at last on the nor, N-O-R apostrophe, W-E-S-T, close parentheses, Herman Melville, March 23, 1853, Pittsburgh.
May I?
Sure.
And this is the whale, by the way.
This is not Moby Dick.
This is the first first.
London Bentley.
Wow.
That's heady.
And it's three volumes, isn't it?
It's three volumes, yeah.
This is the Goodspeed collection of biblical manuscripts.
Is this our Goodspeed collection?
The Boston Goodspeed?
No.
This is Edgar Goodspeed.
No, I didn't think he had that kind of a collection.
He was the first PhD graduate of our Divinity School.
That's not our Goodspeed.
Okay.
Well, in fact, here we are.
Here are the Edward... Oh, no.
That's Edward Goodman Gospels.
So he was a biblical scholar, but also had money, I think, through his wife's family.
So this is a combination of things that he bought and gave to the university, or things that he attracted as gifts through family connections, or things that he had the university buy.
Can you tell me basically what they are?
We're looking at exceedingly old things, I would say.
Is that right?
Yeah.
And you are giving me a catalogue.
There's the Argos electionary, which I think is 10th century.
Is that vellum?
It's vellum, yeah.
That's in Greek, right?
It's in Greek.
Some of these are wonderful for
with their illuminations.
Yeah, I'd love to see my illuminations.
That I won't touch.
Now, this isn't as old.
This is the Elizabeth Day McCormick Apocalypse, circa 1600, and it's on paper rather than vellum.
Hmm, so binding.
It's beautifully done.
Let's put this pen over here.
You've had that for a while.
Yeah.
Yeah, this must have been in the 20s or 30s sometimes.
Oh, my goodness.
Oh, look at, my God.
And it's just page after page like this.
That's exceptional.
And how old is this?
This is circa 1600.
Really?
So this is, printing has been invented, but this is a manuscript.
Right.
Do we know who the illuminator is?
Uh...
I don't know if we know or not.
That one's really pretty nice.
Yeah.
That's a favorite of you, isn't it?
Yes.
Well, there's another one here that I would love to show you but can't.
You've made my day already.
Because it's comparable to this in terms, it's the Rockefeller McCormick New Testament, which also has lots and lots of, isn't that the one she bought at the wholesale?
No.
I think it may be.
It's got lots and lots of illuminations, and it's on vellum.
The problem is the vellum is cockling, and any time you expose it to a change in temperature... This was the Elizabeth Day McCormick Apocalypse.
She's in my... I'm going to shut up a sec.
I love some of these names.
The Red Gospels of Gangesar.
It's G-A-N-J-A-S-A-R.
All of these you'll find more on in the Goodspeed catalog that I give you.
Okay.
This is an Armenian manuscript.
Known as the Red Gospel.
And if that's in the catalog.
Yeah, 1050.
Wow.
That's the approximate date.
And it's called the Red Gospel.
You can see why.
Describe it for me.
What are we looking at?
Well, we're looking at the...
Illuminations on the first opening here, and the predominant color is certainly red in both of them.
It's 900 years old.
Yep.
So there's the Armenian script.
Is it unbelievable how these illuminations can last for almost a millennium?
Yeah.
And some of them are in remarkable condition.
That's nice.
That was the Armenian, the red, and that's in the catalog, right?
Yeah.
You did say upstairs, before we went on tape, that one thing you'd like to do is to integrate all the collections
Is this kind of an example of that, what we're looking at in a microcosm?
Yeah, yeah, I would say so.
To put things with other things that they belong with intellectually.
So, but it is a case of collections complementing.
There is a synergy involved, in other words.
Yes, yes, yes, certainly.
And we've had a number of collectors over the years, particularly faculty collectors, who have consciously collected...
things that they knew we didn't have, knowing that their collection was going to come here someday.
And that it would build and fill in existing collections.
But what do you say to a collector who has this ego thing and wants... It's very delicate.
It's very delicate.
To have it endure as a monument to his or her connoisseurship, you know, and taste.
Delicate is the answer.
Oh, this is a Boccaccio manuscript.
Boccaccio.
Good.
Right.
What catalog is this in?
This is in the catalog that I'm giving you that was for the exhibit that marked the opening of this building in 1970.
And in fact, the cover design comes from this.
Just so I can look for it, because this is magnificent.
This is Boccaccio's genealogy of the pagan gods.
And most of the pictures in here are genealogical charts showing who is related to whom.
When was this book produced?
This is roughly
Roughly contemporary with Boccaccio.
And from whom did this come?
What is this?
I don't remember what the story is on this one.
Oh, here.
Well, it was bought out of general library funds.
When does it say?
It doesn't say here.
I would guess it will say in the catalog.
And if not, I can check for you.
That's OK.
I would guess in the 20s sometime.
Goodbye.
I wonder if they brought it through a dealer or... Oh, look, what's that?
What happened there?
That's a big worm.
I think it's an acid burn of some kind.
Something was spilled on it, and then they cut to repair, because you can see here.
Wow.
Magnificent.
We don't have to go through everything, by the way.
Yeah.
I get the idea.
I think that's fine.
This isn't the kind of library that some of the other libraries that you've visited are, where there's a real emphasis on gathering high spots like this.
I mean, a lot of these have come in coincidentally, and a lot of the effort in building the collection has been in building a research
collection that serves the institution.
That was definitely Bob Rosenthal's philosophy.
Would you say that the collections follow the curriculum, generally?
Or do you have some things that are just wonderful to own that have nothing to do with anything that's taught here?
Yeah, we certainly have things that are wonderful that have nothing to do with what's being taught here now, or maybe was ever taught here, or ever will be taught here.
We have wonderful holdings, for example, of
Dutch emblem books and Dutch drama of the 17th and 18th centuries.
And Dutch hasn't been taught here for 50 years.
But then again, it's research.
It doesn't necessarily have to be taught here.
Yeah, you're sometimes supporting the research of scholars from other institutions rather than your own.
As often as not, perhaps.
I know someone we haven't talked about.
Shaffner, Joseph Shaffner.
S-G-H-A-F-F-N-E-R of Hart Schaffner Marx.
I got the connection.
He collected History of Science, among other things, and gave his History of Science collection here, both books and manuscripts.
Madame Curie.
There's Madame Curie.
Now, without a... Well, you must have some of the Madame Curie things there, I would think.
This would be the place.
Without an inventory, I don't know what to dip into to find what here, except this I can see sticking out.
Oh, look at that.
Well, that's...
It's a Newton Autograph Manuscript, but it's A Count of Charges in the Mint.
That's not very exciting.
Well, it's still.
It's holographic, right?
Newton begins a dictionary of Latin tags.
Look out, look out.
How tight?
Oh, my God, huh?
That's a major manuscript, isn't it?
Yeah.
Does that get you a little nervous to handle that?
Yes.
I'm just going to touch it.
Just a little touch.
What kind of paper is that?
Is that rag, do you think?
Yeah, yeah, it surely would be at that in this period.
Isaac Newton.
And this is Sir Isaac Newton.
Let me just write that down, okay.
What are we looking at?
What is it?
It doesn't look like this is dated.
It's a holograph manuscript written on five folio pages.
Newton begins a dictionary of Latin tags.
Tags.
T-A-G-S, right?
The first entry is abate.
And the last is conduct.
Rarely does Newton give an English version, as in the conduct quotation, but there's a fascinating
aside to the compass quotation, which suggests the compass still used to achieve the correct spacing of the guard.
C-O-M-P-A-S-S, compass.
And that was part of the Portsmouth papers, that manuscript was part of the Portsmouth papers.
You're supposed to be broken up, I guess.
You must have been, yeah.
Too bad.
That's a case where maybe... I think that's fine, Sam.
And he, uh, this came to the university about when, would you say?
Must have been in the... Must have been in the 60s sometime.
I need to check on that for you.
Again, not now.
You don't have to do that today.
Do we... This is a vault.
Does it have a name or is it just a treasure vault?
Just the vault.
And this is the vault.
Right.
Somebody's scabbard is up there.
Yeah, I don't want the stories behind it.
Some of the weirdest things end up in places like this.
There's a whole collection here of Napoleonic stuff.
They've got some Napoleonic stuff at the Newbury, too.
That's stuff, yeah.
Yeah, you know, very memento mori.
That's bizarre.
Yes.
Somewhere in here there's a locket with a lock of his hair in it.
Macaulian's hair.
I'll pass on touching it.
I suspect this was one of those cases where they accepted all this stuff in order to get something else.
That happens everywhere.
In Texas, I have to say, poor Texas does get static for getting things that we're walking by.
This looks like it belongs over at the wing, doesn't it?
Yeah.
I don't know.
I'm not sure what the story is and how we got this.
Unfortunately, it's not used.
Yeah, let's pass on it.
This is Lincoln Pie Safe.
Yes.
From...
Kitchen safe built by Lincoln's father, Thomas Lincoln, and used in his Illinois home.
This came with the garden stuff.
And here it stands.
Here it stands, yes.
I think they got an inquiry a year or so ago from someone who does... Refinishing?
No, no.
Who does these kits, you know, plans for building furniture that are authentic replicas of this or that, and wanted to do this.
Well, if you want to sell them, you can probably... This is an incredible collection.
These are war posters from the First World War.
Lithographs, too, I would say.
Lithographic posters.
I don't like the way that sounds.
It sounds like you're sticking back there.
I'm going to leave that one alone.
Law, not war.
There's a wonderful book published last year in 1984 about World War I posters by Abbeville.
Nice book.
We did a wonderful show of this some years ago.
I bet it was dramatic.
This is really massive.
It has to be massive because the university archives are here as well as the book of Abraham.
Yes, he keeps popping up all over the place.
As well he should.
Someone must have presented this at the University at some point.
It's nice.
It's signed, and we'll have some.
This is a wonderful little collide.
Well, I say little.
It's about 1700, 1800.
volumes, little German almanacs and gift books from late 18th and first half of the 19th century.
That is an example of the kind of thing a university would never go out and collect on its own.
Somebody has to collect that and give it to you.
Right.
Actually, this was bought.
Really?
It came mostly from two different sources.
But you bought it as a collection, though.
Yeah.
And I feel a particular attachment to this collection because we had a volunteer who was in his 90s who finally retired and wanted a project to work on.
And so Bob Rosenthal and I thought, now what can we have this guy work on?
Well, he was a German immigrant from the 30s who loved books and loved art and so on.
And we thought, we'll have him do a checklist
of the of the almanac collection because you know it was catalogued but only as titles so this fellow spent three years coming in every day and going through volume by volume and
looking and seeing, you know, who are the authors that are represented here?
What are the genres that are represented?
You know, are there short stories, are there... Well, he did a wonderful job.
Yeah, and he had a great time doing it.
Remember his name?
Yeah, Bertolt Regensteiner.
Bertolt Regensteiner.
Like the name of the library, but with an E-R on the end of it.
What are the illustrations?
Who are the artists?
Who are the engravers?
And so on.
We still don't have the final product.
We put everything that he did on the computer and are using that to produce indices of artists and authors and editors and so on so that someone who's working on a specific artist or working on a specific author can find out where
where things are in this collection.
What does the collection tell you?
What does the study of this material, what would you use it for?
Well, it's fascinating, for example, from the standpoint of sociology of reading, because this genre was at its heyday in the late 18th, early 19th century, when there was a whole new class of readers in Germany.
particularly women, middle-class women were learning to read.
And so there was a demand for reading material.
And so you have all these things named Minerva and Penelope and Rosa and... That's nice.
We've covered a lot of ground, by the way.
It seems pretty superficial in a way.
There's one more thing I've got to show you because I thought at this time you mentioned...
Phillips, Thomas Phillips.
Oh, yeah.
Because last, a couple years ago, when there were still Phillips things being sold off, um... Trust me, it's not superficial.
It was because I'm writing stories, you know?
This is not, I'm not doing the... This is as big as I've seen, I gotta tell you.
A few years ago, when Krause was selling off Phillips things that he had bought, the fancy stuff wasn't
what we were interested in.
We bought this large collection of Venetian notarial documents.
It's called the Rosenthal collection.
Sam and Marie Louise Rosenthal, who are collectors who live on the North Shore, and who've been very generous to the library over the years, mostly in funds, not in terms of giving things from their collection.
And who are particularly interested in Italian materials.
And so when Bob Rosenthal, no relation, decided to buy this, he went to the director of the library and said, how would it be if we use some of the Rosenthal money for this and then name it after them?
Oh, that's nice.
And this is all Philip's stuff?
This is all Philip's stuff.
That guy was something, wasn't he?
Actually, why don't we, let's, there's no place to look at it.
All right.
I'd love to see some Philip's stuff.
In terms of the three-thirds interest, it's great.
Look at this.
These are documents by Italian notaries, marriage contracts, property transactions, and so on.
Look at the calligraphy, though.
Yeah, well, each notary had his own mark like this.
And so a lot of these documents are related to each other, so you can follow a family through several centuries.
So it's great for historical topics.
It's also just a good thing for young historians to cut their eye teeth on in terms of learning to read scripts of the period and so on.
Very, very useful.
And you probably didn't have to pay a lot of money for it.
No, no.
I don't remember what we paid, but it was quite reasonable.
Bob Rosenthal was so good at how he would orchestrate this kind of thing, because when the boxes came in, he said, now let's open one box, but then let's not open the others.
We're going to bring in Sam and Marie Louise, and we're going to bring in
Jules Kirshner and Eric Cochran from the History Department and a handful of their students, and we'll have a ceremonial opening with a little wine to drink afterwards.
But when we're opening things up, Jules and Eric are immediately going to start
talking about how historically significant this is and how wonderful it is that we've got them.
And he said, Sam and Marie Louise will feel good, as they should, and they'll see a connection.
Sam and Marie Louise Rosenthal.
Right.
Who I interviewed yesterday, by the way.
Did you?
Yes.
I should point that out.
So they gave the money for this?
Yeah.
We talked about what's going to happen to the collection.
I would think that they might have some problems because of having loyalties to more than one institution.
It's a problem.
But I think he wants to be very fair about it.
And you can't ask for more than that.
Yeah.
Yeah, that was nice.
They're a very nice couple.
Yeah.
I'm going to shut the...
You're a winner of the book.
Right, and the freshman... He's collecting the book off.
Right, and the freshman was collecting some science fiction author that I had never heard of before.
That is a twist on it, the senior.
Do I have to write any of this stuff down, or are you going to remember?
I can get it to you.
And you've got my address?
Maybe not.
I don't think so.
Give me that.
I don't have a paragraph.
Chicago mentality.
These self-made men who...
Yeah, they were industrialists or whatever, but, you know, they wanted to make sure that people knew they had a certain eastern polish, too.
Well, you know, it's very interesting, and Paul said this yesterday, there was a feeling here that this was going to be the biggest, most significant city in North America.
Yeah, I think they believed that.
It was doubling in size, and that's what would have knocked me over, the Newbury was its size.
Yeah, yeah.
I'm used to little John Carter Browns, and that's much larger than the Houghton.
Of course, it's not the size of the Widener, but that's a whole other ballgame.
And all these things were happening at the same time.
I mean, the 1890s, you have the Newberry and Carrar bequests, you have the founding of the University of Chicago, you have the founding of the Art Institute, you have the founding of the Chicago Symphony, you have...
This is a way into it, you know.
You have the World's Columbian Exposition, which was, I don't know which way you came from downtown, but straight out from here on the lake is the Museum of Science and Industry, which is in the last surviving building from the World's Columbian Exposition, which was on the lakefront.
Is it true that, I'll just put this on the other side.